---
layout: post
title: Django
categories: [Web Development]
tags: [Python, Web Framework]
---


## Chapter 1: Initial Set Up

This chapter covers how to properly configure your computer to work on Django projects. We
start with an overview of the command line and how to install the latest version of Django and
Python. Then we discuss virtual environments, git, and working with a text editor. By the end of
this chapter you’ll be ready to create and modify new Django projects in just a few keystrokes.
The Command Line
The command line is a powerful, text-only view of your computer. As developers we will use it
extensively throughout this book to install and configure each Django project.
On a Mac, the command line is found in a program called Terminal. To find it, open a new Finder
window, open the Applications directory, scroll down to open the Utilities directory, and doubleclick
the application called Terminal.
On Windows machines there are actually two built-in command shells: the Command shell and
PowerShell. You should use PowerShell, which is the more powerful of the two.
Going forward when the book refers to the “command line” it means to open a new console on
your computer, using either Terminal or PowerShell.
While there are many possible commands we can use, in practice there are six used most
frequently in Django development:

- cd (change down a directory)
- cd .. (change up a directory)
- ls (list files in your current directory on Mac)
- dir (list files in your current directory on Windows)
- pwd (print working directory)
- mkdir (make directory)
- touch (create a new file on Mac)

Open your command line and try them out. The dollar sign ($) is our command line prompt: all
commands in this book are intended to be typed after the $ prompt.
For example, assuming you’re on a Mac, let’s change into our Desktop directory.
Command Line
``` 
cd ~/Desktop
```
Note that our current location, /Desktop, is automatically added before our command line
prompt. To confirm we’re in the proper location we can use pwd which will print out the path of
our current directory.
Command Line
```
~/Desktop $ pwd
/Users/wsv/desktop
```

On my Mac computer this shows that I’m using the user wsv and on the desktop for that account.
Now let’s create a new directory with mkdir, cd into it, and add a new file index.html with
the touch command. Note that Windows machines unfortunately do not support a native touch
command. In future chapters when instructed to create a new file, do so within your text editor
of choice.
Command Line
```
~/Desktop $ mkdir new_dir && cd new_dir
~/Desktop/new_dir $ touch index.html
```
Now use ls to list all current files in our directory. You’ll see there’s just the newly created
index.html.
Command Line
```
~/Desktop/new_dir $ ls
index.html
```
As a final step, return to the Desktop directory with cd .. and use pwd to confirm the location.
Command Line
```
~/Desktop/new_dir $ cd ..
~/Desktop $ pwd
/Users/wsv/desktop
```
Advanced developers can use their keyboard and command line to navigate through their
computer with ease. With practice this approach is much faster than using a mouse.
In this book I’ll give you the exact instructions to run–you don’t need to be an expert on the
command line–but over time it’s a good skill for any professional software developer to develop.
A good free resource for further study is the Command Line Crash Course16.
## Install Python 3
It takes some configuration to properly install Python 3 on a Mac, Windows, Linux, or Chromebook
computer and there are multiple approaches. Many developers–especially beginners–
follow the advice on the official Python website17 to download distinct versions of Python directly
onto their computer and then adjust the PATH variable18 accordingly.
The problem with this approach is that updating the PATH variable correctly is tricky, by
downloading Python directly updates are harder to maintain, and there are now much easier
ways to install and start using Python quickly.
I host a dedicated website, InstallPython3.com19, with up-to-date guides for installing Python
3 on Mac, Windows, or Linux computers. Please refer there to install Python correctly on your
local machine.

## Virtual Environments

Virtual environments20 are an indispensable part of Python programming. They are an isolated
container containing all the software dependencies for a given project. This is important because
by default software like Python and Django is installed in the same directory. This causes a
problem when you want to work on multiple projects on the same computer. What if ProjectA
uses Django 3.1 but ProjectB from last year is still on Django 2.2? Without virtual environments
this becomes very difficult; with virtual environments it’s no problem at all.
There are many areas of software development that are hotly debated, but using virtual environments
for Python development is not one. You should use a dedicated virtual environment for
each new Python project.
In this book we will use Pipenv21 to manage virtual environments. Pipenv is similar to npm and yarn
from the JavaScript/Node ecosystem: it creates a Pipfile containing software dependencies
and a Pipfile.lock for ensuring deterministic builds. “Determinism” means that each and every
time you download the software in a new virtual environment, you will have exactly the same
configuration.
Sebastian McKenzie, the creator of Yarn22 which first introduced this concept to JavaScript
packaging, has a concise blog post explaining what determinism is and why it matters23. The
end result is that we will create a new virtual environment with Pipenv for each new Django
Project.
To install Pipenv we can use pip3 which Homebrew automatically installed for us alongside
Python 3.

## Install Django
To see Pipenv in action, let’s create a new directory and install Django. First, navigate to the
Desktop, create a new directory django, and enter it with cd.
Command Line
```
$ cd ~/Desktop
$ mkdir django
$ cd django
```
Now use Pipenv to install Django. Note the use of = which will ensure security updates for
Django, such as 3.1.1, 3.1.2, and so on.
Command Line
``` python
$ pipenv install django~=3.1.0
```
If you look within our directory, there are now two new files: Pipfile and Pipfile.lock. We
have the information we need for a new virtual environment but we have not activated it yet.
Let’s do that with pipenv shell.
Command Line
```
$ pipenv shell
```
If you are on a Mac you should now see parentheses around the name of your current directory
on your command line which indicates the virtual environment is activated. Since we’re in a
django directory that means we should see (django) at the beginning of the command line
prompt. Windows users will not see the shell prompt. If you can run django-admin startproject
in the next section then you know your virtual environment has Django installed properly.
Command Line
```
(django) $
```
This means it’s working! Create a new Django project called config with the following command.
Don’t forget that period . at the end.
Command Line
``` python
(django) $ django-admin startproject config .
```
It’s worth pausing here to explain why you should add a period (.) to the command. If you just run
django-admin startproject config then by default Django will create this directory structure:
```
Layout
└── config
├── config
│ ├── __init__.py
│ ├── asgi.py
│ ├── settings.py
│ ├── urls.py
│ └── wsgi.py
└── manage.py
```
See how it creates a new directory config and then within it a manage.py file and a config
directory? That feels redundant to me since we already created and navigated into a django
directory on our Desktop. By running django-admin startproject config . with the period at
the end–which says, install in the current directory–the result is instead this:
```
Layout
├── config
│ ├── __init__.py
│ ├── asgi.py
│ ├── settings.py
│ ├── urls.py
│ └── wsgi.py
└── manage.py
```
Now let’s confirm everything is working by running Django’s local web server.
Command Line
``` python
(django) $ python manage.py runserver
Watching for file changes with StatReloader
Performing system checks...
System check identified no issues (0 silenced).
You have 18 unapplied migration(s). Your project may not work properly until
you apply the migrations for app(s): admin, auth, contenttypes, sessions.
Run 'python manage.py migrate' to apply them.
August 3, 2020 - 14:52:27
Django version 3.1, using settings 'config.settings'
Starting development server at http://127.0.0.1:8000/
Quit the server with CONTROL-C.
```